Added time server description (#2)
uptane/deployment-considerations: repositories.md

# Setting up Uptane repositories

This page outlines recommended procedures for the one-time operations that an OEM and its suppliers MUST perform when they set up Uptane for the first time. In particular, they SHOULD correctly configure the director and image repositories, as well as the time server, so that the impact of a repository / server compromise is limited to as few ECUs as possible.

## Secure Source of Time

> Uptane repositories need access to a secure source of time. If an ECU does not have a secure clock, we recommend the use of a Time Server for time attestations. This section describes how a Time Server can be used in an Uptane implementation.

Author: This is a MUST in the [standard](https://uptane.github.io/papers/ieee-isto-6100.1.0.0.uptane-standard.html#in-vehicle-implementation-requirements), so I don't want to get it confused by adding a SHOULD here

  - The signature over the Time Server's response is valid.
  - The tokens provided to the Time Server have been included in the response.
  - The time in the Time Server's response is later than the last time verified in this manner.

#### ECU Version Report

The payload of the ECU version report should contain the latest time downloaded from the Time Server. In addition, the report should include a token (nonce) for the Time Server to sign and send back.

#### Changes to all ECUs

At build time, ECUs will be provisioned with an attestation of the current time downloaded from the Time Server.

As the first step to verifying metadata, described as "Load and verify the current time or the most recent securely attested time" in the Standard, the ECU SHOULD load and verify the  most recent time from the Time Server using the following procedure:

1. Verify that the signatures on the downloaded time are valid.

> 2. Verify that the list of nonces/tokens in the downloaded time includes the token that the ECU sent in its previous version report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Verify that the list of tokens in the downloaded time includes the token that the ECU sent in its previous version report.
```

3. Verify that the time downloaded is greater than the previous time.

> If all three steps complete without error, the ECU SHALL overwrite its current attested time with the time it has just downloaded, and generate a new nonce/token for the next request to the Time Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If all three steps complete without error, the ECU SHALL overwrite its current attested time with the time it has just downloaded, and generate a new token for the next request to the Time Server.
```

If any check fails, the ECU SHALL NOT overwrite its current attested time, and SHALL jump to the last step ([Create and Send Version Report](https://uptane.github.io/uptane-standard/uptane-standard.html#create_version_report)), and report the error. The ECU MUST reuse its previous token for the next request to the Time Server.

#### Changes to checking Root metadata

> After updating to the most recent Root metadata file, check the Timeserver key. If the Timeserver key is listed in the Root metadata and has been rotated, reset the clock used to determine the expiration of metadata to a minimal value (e.g. zero, or any time that is guaranteed to not be in the future based on other evidence).  It will be updated in the next cycle.

Reviewer: Explain why.

Author: This was in a previous version of the standard, so I'm not sure why it was added. I think it is to ensure that the new timeserver does not accidentally cause a warning about a rollback.

Reviewer: Yes, I meant please add this explanation to the doc :)

#### Changes to all ECUs

At build time, ECUs will be provisioned with an attestation of the current time downloaded from the Time Server.

As the first step to verifying metadata, described as "Load and verify the current time or the most recent securely attested time" in the Standard, the ECU SHOULD load and verify the  most recent time from the Time Server using the following procedure:

1. Verify that the signatures on the downloaded time are valid.
2. Verify that the list of tokens in the downloaded time includes the token that the ECU sent in its previous version report.
3. Verify that the time downloaded is greater than the previous time.

If all three steps complete without error, the ECU SHALL overwrite its current attested time with the time it has just downloaded, and generate a new token for the next request to the Time Server.

If any check fails, the ECU SHALL NOT overwrite its current attested time, and SHALL jump to the last step ([Create and Send Version Report](https://uptane.github.io/uptane-standard/uptane-standard.html#create_version_report)), and report the error. The ECU MUST reuse its previous token for the next request to the Time Server.

> #### Changes to checking Root metadata

Reviewer: Sorry, @mnm678, just one more thing: you also need to say the same thing for PV secondaries when checking the Targets metadata from the Director repository, no?

# Setting up Uptane repositories

> This page outlines recommended procedures for the one-time operations that an OEM and its suppliers MUST perform when they set up Uptane for the first time. In particular, they SHOULD correctly configure the director and image repositories, as well as the time server, so that the impact of a repository / server compromise is limited to as few ECUs as possible.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Jon's comment about the tone of these deployment perhaps being too formal and "standard-like." I would like to tackle that once the important textual elements are in place. However, before doing so, we might want to consider the long-range destination of this copy. If it is to be collected as a versioned document at some point, a more formal tone might be called for.

## Secure Source of Time

> Without access to a secure source of time, ECUs may be prevented from receiving the most recent updates. If the ECU's time is too high, the ECU will detect that the current valid metadata is expired and will be unable to perform an update. If the ECU's time is too low, an attacker would be able to replay old metadata to the ECU and install an old, potentially insecure, version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Without access to a secure source of time, ECUs may be prevented from receiving the most recent updates. If the ECU's time is too high, the ECU will detect that the current valid metadata is expired and will be unable to perform an update. If the ECU's time is too low, an attacker can prevent time from moving forward significantly to replay old metadata to the ECU.  (ECUs in Uptane will not accept an earlier time than what has been seen before signed with the same key.)
```

Reviewer 3: This may still need work.  I'd like someone outside NYU to review...

To prevent these issues, ECUs need access to a secure source of time. If an ECU does not have a secure clock, we recommend the use of a Time Server for time attestations. This section describes how a Time Server can be used in an Uptane implementation.

### Time server

A Time Server is a server that is responsible for the distribution of a secure source of time.

The Time Server exists to inform ECUs about the current time in a cryptographically secure way, since many ECUs in a vehicle do not have a reliable source of time. The Time Server receives a list of tokens from vehicles, and returns back a list of signed records containing every token in the original list of tokens received and at least one instance of the current time.

> If the Time Server is used, it MUST conform to the following requirements:

Reviewer 4: Are we allowed to use a "MUST" in the deployment doc?

Reviewer 5: CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED would be appropriate here.

* The Time Server SHALL expose a public interface allowing primaries to communicate with it. This communication MAY occur over FTP, FTPS, SFTP, HTTP, or HTTPS.

* Rotation of the The Time Server's key is performed by listing the new key in the Director's Root metadata, in the same manner as other role keys are listed, and also in the Director's Targets metadata (for partial verification secondaries).

#### Changes to the Director repository
If a Time Server is in use, a representation of the Time Server public key is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED in Director repository root metadata.

If a Time Server is implemented AND partial-verification secondaries are used, the following metadata is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED in the Director repository's Targets metadata:

* A representation of the public key(s) for the Time Server, similar to the representation of public keys in Root metadata.

Listing the public key of the Time Server in Director targets metadata is necessary to allow partial-verification secondaries to perform time server key rotation.

#### Changes to a Primary

> If the Time Server is implemented, the primary SHALL use the following procedure to verify the time. This procedure occurs after the vehicle version manifest is sent and will fulfill the "Download and check current time" step of the Uptane Standard.

Reviewer 2: I'm going to go through probably today to fix the MUSTs in all the pages, per our discussion in last week's meeting. However, since Marina has been shepherding this PR, I think I should let her fix the SHALLS and MUSTs in this file to avoid any possible conflict.

1. Gather the tokens from each secondary ECU's version report.
2. Send the list of tokens to the Time Server to fetch the current time. The time server responds as described in [Time Server](#time_server), providing a cryptographic attestation of the last known time.
3. If the Time Server's response meets the criteria below, update the primary ECU's clock and retain the Time Server's response for distribution to secondary ECUs, otherwise discard it and proceed without an updated time.  The criteria for checking the Time Server's response are:
  - The signature over the Time Server's response is valid.
  - The tokens provided to the Time Server have been included in the response.
  - The time in the Time Server's response is later than the last time verified in this manner.

#### ECU Version Report

> The payload of the ECU version report should contain the latest time downloaded from the Time Server. In addition, the report should include a token (which MUST be used exactly once) for the Time Server to sign and send back.

Reviewer 4: Another "MUST", and in this case, it's not immediately obvious to me why it is necessary. Why should the token only be used once? It's not an onerous burden, but I'd like to understand the requirement.

#### Changes to all ECUs

At build time, ECUs will be provisioned with an attestation of the current time downloaded from the Time Server.

As the first step to verifying metadata, described as "Load and verify the current time or the most recent securely attested time" in the Standard, the ECU SHOULD load and verify the  most recent time from the Time Server using the following procedure:

1. Verify that the signatures on the downloaded time are valid.
2. Verify that the list of tokens in the downloaded time includes the token that the ECU sent in its previous version report.
3. Verify that the time downloaded is greater than the previous time.

If all three steps complete without error, the ECU SHALL overwrite its current attested time with the time it has just downloaded, and generate a new token for the next request to the Time Server.

> If any check fails, the ECU SHALL NOT overwrite its current attested time, and SHALL jump to the last step ([Create and Send Version Report](https://uptane.github.io/uptane-standard/uptane-standard.html#create_version_report)), and report the error. The ECU MUST reuse its previous token for the next request to the Time Server.

Reviewer 4: Another "MUST" (and "SHALL"s), and here it says to reuse the previous token, despite that above it said to use tokens exactly once.

Author: I could not figure out why the token should be reused in this case, so I took this sentence out. If anyone has insight into why this was required let me know and I can add it back with an explanation.

@trishankatdatadog @justincappos

Reviewer: Marina and I decided that it's safest not to reuse the token. Assuming that: (1) updates are relatively infrequent due to limited write cycles on many ECUs, and (2) there is a large enough number of tokens per ECU, then (3) we should be OK.

# Setting up Uptane repositories

This page outlines recommended procedures for the one-time operations that an OEM and its suppliers SHOULD perform when they set up Uptane for the first time. In particular, they SHOULD correctly configure the director and image repositories, as well as the time server, so that the impact of a repository / server compromise is limited to as few ECUs as possible.

## Secure Source of Time

> Without access to a secure source of time, ECUs may be prevented from receiving the most recent updates. If the ECU's time is too high, the ECU will detect that the current valid metadata is expired and will be unable to perform an update. If the ECU's time is too low, an attacker can prevent time from moving forward significantly to replay old metadata to the ECU.  (ECUs in Uptane will not accept an earlier time than what has been seen before signed with the same key.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without access to a secure source of time, ECUs may be prevented from receiving the most recent updates. If the ECU's time is too high, the ECU will detect that the current valid metadata is expired and will be unable to perform an update. If the ECU's time is too low, an attacker can freeze or replay old metadata to the ECU.  (ECUs in Uptane will not accept an earlier time than what has been seen before signed with the same key.)
```

To prevent these issues, ECUs need access to a secure source of time. If an ECU does not have a secure clock, we recommend the use of a Time Server for time attestations. This section describes how a Time Server can be used in an Uptane implementation.

### Time server

> A Time Server is a server that is responsible for the distribution of a secure source of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Time Server is a server that is responsible to act as a secure source of time.
```

The Time Server exists to inform ECUs about the current time in a cryptographically secure way, since many ECUs in a vehicle do not have a reliable source of time. The Time Server receives a list of tokens from vehicles, and returns back a list of signed records containing every token in the original list of tokens received and at least one instance of the current time.

If the Time Server is used, it is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED to conform to the following requirements:

> * When the Time Server receives a sequence of tokens from a vehicle, it will provide one or more signed responses, containing the time along with these tokens. It MAY produce either one signed time attestation containing the current time and all tokens, or multiple time attestations each containing the current time and one or more tokens.

Reviewer: Not clear in the latter case whether all original tokens MUST be present, but this can be easily checked during ECU verification of the response.

> * The Time Server will expose a public interface allowing primaries to communicate with it. This communication MAY occur over FTP, FTPS, SFTP, HTTP, or HTTPS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Time Server will expose a public interface allowing primaries to communicate with it. This communication MAY occur over FTP, FTPS, SFTP, HTTP, HTTPS, or another transport control of the implementor's choice.
```

> * Rotation of the The Time Server's key is performed by listing the new key in the Director's Root metadata, in the same manner as other role keys are listed, and also in the Director's Targets metadata (for partial verification secondaries).

Reviewer: Do we have an example of how the Time Server's key may be listed in the Director's Targets metadata? Not saying it's impossible, just saying it's unclear, but maybe this can come later.

#### Changes to the Director repository
If a Time Server is in use, a representation of the Time Server public key is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED in Director repository root metadata.

If a Time Server is implemented AND partial-verification secondaries are used, the following metadata is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED in the Director repository's Targets metadata:

* A representation of the public key(s) for the Time Server, similar to the representation of public keys in Root metadata.

Listing the public key of the Time Server in Director targets metadata is necessary to allow partial-verification secondaries to perform time server key rotation.

#### Changes to a Primary

> If the Time Server is implemented, the primary is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED to use the following procedure to verify the time. This procedure occurs after the vehicle version manifest is sent and will fulfill the "Download and check current time" step of the Uptane Standard.

Reviewer: Please link to this exact step, if possible.

1. Gather the tokens from each secondary ECU's version report.
2. Send the list of tokens to the Time Server to fetch the current time. The time server responds as described in [Time Server](#time_server), providing a cryptographic attestation of the last known time.
3. If the Time Server's response meets the criteria below, update the primary ECU's clock and retain the Time Server's response for distribution to secondary ECUs, otherwise discard it and proceed without an updated time.  The criteria for checking the Time Server's response are:
  - The signature over the Time Server's response is valid.

>   - The tokens provided to the Time Server have been included in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - All the tokens provided to the Time Server have been included in the response.
```

  - The time in the Time Server's response is later than the last time verified in this manner.

#### ECU Version Report

> The payload of the ECU version report should contain the latest time downloaded from the Time Server. In addition, the report should include a token (which SHOULD be used exactly once to prevent a replay attack) for the Time Server to sign and send back.

Reviewer: Why should the token be sent in the ECU Version Report to the Director?

#### Changes to all ECUs

At build time, ECUs will be provisioned with an attestation of the current time downloaded from the Time Server.

As the first step to verifying metadata, described as "Load and verify the current time or the most recent securely attested time" in the Standard, the ECU SHOULD load and verify the  most recent time from the Time Server using the following procedure:

1. Verify that the signatures on the downloaded time are valid.

> 2. Verify that the list of tokens in the downloaded time includes the token that the ECU sent in its previous version report.

Reviewer: I'm confused. If an ECU is doing this for the first time, where would its previous version report be?

> As the first step to verifying metadata, described as ["Load and verify the current time or the most recent securely attested time"](https://uptane.github.io/papers/ieee-isto-6100.1.0.0.uptane-standard.html#partial_verification) in the Standard, the ECU SHOULD load and verify the most recent time from the Time Server using the following procedure:

Reviewer: Actually I think you mean [this](https://uptane.github.io/papers/ieee-isto-6100.1.0.0.uptane-standard.html#check_time_primary) and [this](https://uptane.github.io/papers/ieee-isto-6100.1.0.0.uptane-standard.html#verify_time)

3. Verify that the time downloaded is greater than the previous time.

If all three steps complete without error, the ECU is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED to overwrite its current attested time with the time it has just downloaded, and generate a new token for the next request to the Time Server.

> If any check fails, the ECU is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED to NOT overwrite its current attested time, and jump to the last step ([Create and Send Version Report](https://uptane.github.io/uptane-standard/uptane-standard.html#create_version_report)), and report the error.

Reviewer: Maybe just make clearer why we decided not to reuse tokens.

### Time server

A Time Server is a server that is responsible to act as a secure source of time.

The Time Server exists to inform ECUs about the current time in a cryptographically secure way, since many ECUs in a vehicle do not have a reliable source of time. The Time Server receives a list of tokens from vehicles, and returns back a list of signed records containing every token in the original list of tokens received and at least one instance of the current time.

If the Time Server is used, it is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED to conform to the following requirements:

* When the Time Server receives a sequence of tokens from a vehicle, it will provide one or more signed responses, containing the time along with these tokens. It MAY produce either one signed time attestation containing the current time and all tokens, or multiple time attestations each containing the current time and one or more tokens. All tokens should be included in the response.

* The Time Server will expose a public interface allowing primaries to communicate with it. This communication MAY occur over FTP, FTPS, SFTP, HTTP, HTTPS, or another transport control of the implementor's choice.

> * Rotation of the The Time Server's key is performed by listing the new key in the Director's Root metadata, in the same manner as other role keys are listed, and also in the custom field of the Director Repository's Targets metadata (for partial verification secondaries).

Reviewer 4: @jhdalek55 I agree with all of your stated guidelines, and I agree that we should have a style guide for reference's sake. I can put that in the README of the standards doc (or in a separate doc or different repo) if you'd like.

> * Rotation of the The Time Server's key is performed by listing the new key in the Director's Root metadata, in the same manner as other role keys are listed, and also in the custom field of the Director Repository's Targets metadata (for partial verification secondaries).

Reviewer 2: At least for now, the README in the Standard document is probably the best place to put the style guide. If in time it becomes too large and ungainly there, we could always move it elsewhere. So, if you would like to set this up, that would be great.

#### Changes to the Director repository
If a Time Server is in use, a representation of the Time Server public key is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED in Director repository root metadata.

If a Time Server is implemented AND partial verification Secondaries are used, the following metadata is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED in the Director repository's Targets metadata:

* A representation of the public key(s) for the Time Server, similar to the representation of public keys in Root metadata.

> Listing the public key of the Time Server in Director Targets metadata is necessary to allow partial-verification Secondaries to perform Time Server key rotation.

Reviewer 4: Sorry, one more!
```suggestion
Listing the public key of the Time Server in Director Targets metadata is necessary to allow partial verification Secondaries to perform Time Server key rotation.
```

Reviewer 2: I would suggest, if this PR is now technically correct that we commit what is here. I think the comment of @tkfu needs to be addressed across the board on all pages. So rather than hold up this already lengthy set of commits, let's merge this PR and address the style issue at a later time. I would like to do such a pass myself once the content is more or less set.

If the Time Server is implemented, the primary is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED to use the following procedure to verify the time. This procedure occurs after the vehicle version manifest is sent and will fulfill the ["Download and check current time"](https://uptane.github.io/papers/ieee-isto-6100.1.0.0.uptane-standard.html#check_time_primary) step of the Uptane Standard.

1. Gather the tokens from each secondary ECU's version report.
2. Send the list of tokens to the Time Server to fetch the current time. The Time Server responds as described in [Time Server](#time_server), providing a cryptographic attestation of the last known time.
3. If the Time Server's response meets the criteria below, update the primary ECU's clock and retain the Time Server's response for distribution to secondary ECUs, otherwise discard it and proceed without an updated time.  The criteria for checking the Time Server's response are:
  - The signature over the Time Server's response is valid.
  - All the tokens provided to the Time Server have been included in the response.
  - The time in the Time Server's response is later than the last time verified in this manner.

#### ECU Version Report

> The ECU version report from each Secondary will contain a token to be sent to the Time Server. This token SHOULD be unique for each update cycle to prevent a replay. As updates are relatively infrequent and there are a large number of possible tokens, the token will be able to be unique for every update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ECU version report from each Secondary will contain a token to be sent to the Time Server. This token SHOULD be unique for each update cycle to prevent a replay. Since we expect updates to be relatively infrequent (e.g., due to limited number of write cycles), and that there are a large number of possible tokens, it should be possible to produce a unique token for every update.
```

If the Time Server is used, it is CONDITIONALLY REQUIRED to conform to the following requirements:

> * When the Time Server receives a sequence of tokens from a vehicle, it will provide one or more signed responses, containing the time along with these tokens. It MAY produce either one signed time attestation containing the current time and all tokens, or multiple time attestations each containing the current time and one or more tokens. In the second case, all tokens must be contained in one of the time attestations sent.

Reviewer: Sorry, that's not what is meant either. I think we should simply say that all tokens must be included in the response, that should be it.
